---
layout:     post
title:      "CEO fraud or business email compromise (BEC)"
subtitle:   "Don't let attackers add you to a growing list of victims."
date:       2017-11-17 12:00:00
permalink:  /ceo-fraud/
author:     "dario"
header-img: "img/ceo-fraud.jpeg"
header-title:
header-author:
header-credit-link: "https://pixabay.com/en/security-protection-anti-virus-265130/"
header-license:  CC0
---

## Billions defrauded by criminal organizations
Business e-mail compromise (BEC) is a sophisticated type of fraud that can take a variety of forms. In one variant, called CEO fraud,  organized crime groups impersonate an official or executive of an organization with the intent of deceiving employees in financial positions to initiate an urgent wire transfer of funds. By searching for public information on the organizational structure of their intended victim, using social engineering, and penetrating the internal IT network of their target, they gather information on employee relationships, identify security procedures, and seek specific opportunities, such as a business trip by the CEO, to spoof email accounts and enable them to pass themselves off as the traveling CEO, requesting an urgent wire transfer to a new supplier. The relatively high rate of success coupled with the low risks associated with this type of fraud has led to an explosive growth in organized criminal groups trying their hand at pulling it off. These targeted attacks can enable the perpetrators to fraudulently obtain millions of dollars from victimized organizations.

> ### the BEC scam continues to grow, evolve, and target businesses of all sizes. Since January 2015, there has been a 1,300 percent increase in identified exposed losses, now totaling over $3 billion.
-- <cite>IC3, the FBI’s business crime complaint unit</cite>  

### Who are their targets?
The criminal groups who employ deceptive fraud transfer ploys target large and small organizations all over the world. Non-profits, well-known corporations, public organizations, and local businesses are all potential targets. As the list below demonstrates, multinational high-tech corporations have been victimized, since this type of scam does not rely on finding a technical breach to enable attackers to initiate fraudulent wire transfers themselves. It is based on deceiving people from within any organization to initiate the transfer, believing it to be a legitimate request.

**Corporate victims of CEO fraud or business e-mail compromise (BEC) fraud**  

| Company  |  Defrauded in CEO or BEC Scam|
|----------|-----------------------------:|
| Ubiquiti |                $46.7 million |
| KPMG     |                 €7.6 million |
| Mattel   |                   $3 million |
| Michelin |                 €1.6 million |

**Small businesses are affected too**  
Smaller companies face similar threats too; in fact, some smaller business would not survive if they where to fall victim to this scam. Believing that ‘It won’t happen to us’ is unwise, no matter the size of your organization. In fact a large corporation has the resources bring in specialized firms to perform security reviews and forensic audits, write off the loss, turn around and file a claim with their insurer. Unfortunately by the time a small business figures out it was the victim of a deceptive fraud transfer scam it may be too late. The funds it lost will probably never be recovered, putting the small business in a very difficult financial position in a relatively short lapse of time.

> ### the average loss per scam is between $25,000 and $75,000.
-- <cite>IC3, the FBI’s business crime complaint unit</cite>

### The criminal organizations behind these scammers
The criminal groups that engage in business e-mail compromise scams can be extremely sophisticated. These transnational criminal groups can employ lawyers, linguists, hackers, and social engineers. Some even have accomplices inside financial institutions to help them quickly transfer out the proceeds before they are frozen and returned to the victims. They employ various methods to launder the proceeds, ensuring the funds will be difficult to recover. They are continually honing their techniques to exploit unsuspecting victims, while staying one step ahead of the authorities.

Business e-mail compromise (BEC) scams can take a variety of forms. In just about every case, the scammers target employees with access to company finances and deceive them into making wire transfers to bank accounts thought to belong to trusted partners—except the money ends up in accounts controlled by the criminals. In it's common forms, such as CEO fraud, the modern techniques used to pull off the deception often include online ploys such as spear-phishing, social engineering, identity theft, e-mail spoofing, and the use of malware.

**Some online tools used to target and exploit victims:**
* **Spoofing e-mail accounts and websites:** Slight variations on legitimate addresses (john.kelly@acme.com vs. john.kelley@acme.com) fool victims into thinking fake accounts are authentic. The criminals then use a spoofing tool to direct e-mail responses to a different account that they control. The victim thinks he is corresponding with his CEO, but that is not the case.
* **Spear-phishing:** Bogus e-mails believed to be from a trusted sender prompt victims to reveal confidential information to the perpetrators.
* **Malware:** Used to infiltrate company networks and gain access to legitimate e-mail threads about billing and invoices. That information is used to make sure the suspicions of an accountant or financial officer aren’t raised when a fraudulent wire transfer is requested. Malware also allows criminals undetected access to a victim’s data, including passwords and financial account information.

In some cases the criminals will use malware to monitor communications and intercept warnings or messages from the victims commercial partners or financial institutions immediately after the fraudulent wire transfer was initiated. This gives the criminals enough time to transfer out the proceeds of the crime and begin the processes of laundering their gains, leaving little chance to recover the funds.

### General steps to avoid being a victim
 As sophisticated as CEO fraud is, there is an easy solution to thwart it: face-to-face or voice-to-voice communications.

 > ### The best way to avoid being exploited is to verify the authenticity of requests to send money by walking into the CEO’s office or speaking to him or her directly on the phone. Don’t rely on e-mail alone.
 -- <cite>Martin Licciardo, special agent, FBI Washington Field Office</cite>  

Speaking to the person requesting the wire transfer should always be a priority. Asking employees not to rely on phone numbers presented in the email of the request is also good practice. Employees should also be weary if they receive a phone call a short time after having read an email request. The employee should seek assistance from coworkers to verify the request. The more people look into exceptional requests, the higher the probability a scam can be uncovered before it is too late. Systems and procedures can be adapted to help employees identify high risk situations and enable them to spot any unusual request.

**Methods to safeguard against CEO fraud:**

* Create intrusion detection system rules that flag e-mails with extensions that are similar to company e-mail. For example, legitimate e-mail of acme_company.com would flag fraudulent e-mail of acme-company.com.
* Create an e-mail rule to flag e-mail communications where the “reply” e-mail address is different from the “from” e-mail address shown.
* Color code virtual correspondence so e-mails from employee/internal accounts are one color and e-mails from non-employee/external accounts are another.
* Verify changes in vendor payment location by adding additional two-factor authentication such as having secondary sign-off by company personnel.
* Confirm requests for transfers of funds by using phone verification as part of a two-factor authentication; use previously known numbers, not the numbers provided in the e-mail request.
* Carefully scrutinize all e-mail requests for transfer of funds to determine if the requests are out of the ordinary.

As is the case with other types of malicious attacks, [multiple layers of security]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link _services/protect-assets-service.md %}) are recommended as part of an effective prevention program:

* **Identify risk -** Identify high-risk employees
* **Define security and privacy policies -** Define financial security objectives
* **Customize security training and awareness programs -** Train employees to be aware of red flags
* **Keep information systems current and up to date -** Reduce vulnerabilities
* **Develop business continuity and disaster recovery plans**
* **Install preventive controls -** Detect and prevent threats
* **Maintain comprehensive logs and audit trails -** Detect security breaches
* **Evaluate cyber liability insurance -** A last resort against major losses

If you or your company have been victimized by a business e-mail compromise (BEC) scam, it’s important to act quickly. Contact your financial institution immediately and request that they contact the financial institution where the fraudulent transfer was sent. Next, call the proper local authorities, and file a complaint.

The key is to train staff to recognize suspicious emails and other communications, and to provide them with clear procedures when dealing with funds transfers in particular. [CEO fraud](https://www.canada.ca/en/competition-bureau/news/2017/06/show_them_who_s_thebossshutdownthefakeceoscam.html){:rel="nofollow"}{:target="_blank"} can be stopped.
